HARVARD UNIVERSITY  
OFFICE OF TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT
Startup Guide
An entrepreneur’s guide for  
Harvard University faculty, graduate students,  
and postdoctoral fellows

TABLE OF CONTENTS
 Why Start a Company?    2
 Key Considerations    5
 Startup Process    6
 Funding Sources    7
 Presenting to Investors    8
 Financing T erminology    10 
 Company Considerations    13
 Equity Considerations    14
 Some Resources for Entrepreneurs    15
 Key Factors for Success    16
We have created this handbook to serve as a high-level guide and overview of some  
key questions and issues that may confront you, the aspiring entrepreneur, as you begin 
your quest to start a new company around innovations emanating from your lab.  
Its purpose is not to supply all the answers, but rather to provide a starting point for 
engaging you in a conversation with the Office of T echnology Development (OTD) 
about your entrepreneurial journey.
OTD works closely with Harvard faculty, graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows  
to explore the potential of forming startup companies around new inventions and 
platform technologies arising from their research. Creating a startup company, also 
known as a NewCo, is a viable and often attractive alternative to working with an established company. A NewCo can expedite the development and commercialization 
of nascent technologies that satisfy unmet market needs and benefit the public good.
OTD has the entrepreneurial expertise to guide Harvard investigators through the 
challenging process of organizing and starting a new company. Our team members have 
extensive experience catalyzing and forming early-stage startup ventures, having 
founded and secured funding for such companies, and have participated in successful company exits.
I hope that you will make OTD your partner in pursuing your entrepreneurial vision: we 
are eager to be your sounding board, to address your questions, and to guide you through the process of launching a new company. Please take the next step and stop by 
OTD anytime to discuss your startup ideas. We encourage you to explore the potential 
of entrepreneurship and become part of Harvard’s expanding startup ecosystem.
Isaac T. Kohlberg  
Senior Associate Provost  
Chief T echnology Development Officer
1
Why Start a Company?
When launching a new company, there are a 
number of factors to take into consideration. 
The reality is that only some inventions may 
be suitable for the creation of a startup company. Innovations may progress more 
quickly in a focused startup than in an 
academic lab or a large company. Along with the invention team, OTD helps in analyzing 
several factors to determine whether a 
startup is the most appropriate path to commercialization:
•  Demand: Potential of the core technology 
to provide a solid platform for multiple 
markets or product opportunities.
•  Competition: Identification of other 
companies that offer similar solutions.•  Licensing: Likelihood of interest from existing companies in licensing the technology.
•  Funding: Availability of capital to build  and grow the business, together with  
the interest, capabilities, and track record 
of likely investors.
• Commitment: Level of commitment and 
involvement of the inventors.
•  Support: Presence of a true business 
champion for both the technology and  
the new venture.
•  Management: Experience, passion, and drive of the startup’s executive team.
OFFICE OF TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT
OUR MISSION
OTD’s mission is to make the fruits of Harvard research more accessible outside the 
University, including underserved communities, and to ensure that society benefits from 
Harvard innovations by fostering their swift, professional, and effective development  
and commercialization.
T o this end, OTD seeks to foster a spirit of innovation and entrepreneurship among the 
faculty, harness the power of Harvard’s substantive intellectual property, and advance the 
development of new discoveries made by the faculty for the good of society. Aspects of 
our mission relevant to starting new companies include:
Promoting Innovation and Entrepreneurship 
Encouraging innovation and accelerating technology transfer in a manner consistent  
with Harvard’s tradition of academic independence, public service, and commitment  
to the community.
Protecting and Harnessing Intellectual Property 
Evaluating, patenting, licensing, and, when appropriate, creating startup companies 
around new inventions and discoveries made by Harvard’s faculty.
2
 “OTD’s knowledge of what it takes to start a company is  
 based on firsthand experience and was vital to our ability  
 to get our NewCo off the ground. They were with us every  
 step of the way, offering valuable guidance and feedback.”
— GÖkHAN S. HOTAmISLIGIL
 J.S. Simmons Professor of Genetics and metabolism  
 Chair, Department of Genetics and Complex Diseases 
 Harvard School of Public Health
3
  
 “OTD was masterful in the initiation phase of the   
 licensing process. Even more important, as our  
 research progressed, they developed packages for  
 a follow-on license that enabled the company to  
 secure a major strategic corporate partnership.”
— GrEGOry L. VErDINE
 Erving Professor of Chemistry 
 Department of Stem Cell and r egenerative Biology 
 Harvard Faculty of Arts and Sciences
4
1 Is the invention a disruptive technology? 
If not, how would it be categorized?
2 How soon can a commercial product come to market?
3 What is the level of risk associated with this startup?
4 Does the technology have clear  applications and a definable market?
5 Who owns the intellectual property  
(IP)? For more information, refer  
to OTD’s Inventor’s Handbook and  Harvard’s IP policies.
6 What will be my role in the new com-pany: full–time employee, advisory board 
member, executive, or consultant?
7 What are the goals for the company?  Is it to grow the company and position it 
for an acquisition or a possible initial public offering (IPO)? Or, is it to build a 
small, yet sustainable business?
8 Will capital from private investment 
companies be needed? If so, will the 
company eventually be sold or go  
public? Private investors rely on these 
exit strategies to get a return on their 
investments.
9 What is the current value of the com-pany? Pre-money valuations (valuation  
of a company prior to an investment)  
of early-stage companies are generally  
in the $1–3 million range. Key Considerations
Below are items to consider when deciding whether or not to start a NewCo: 
 The valuations are based on several  
factors, including:
• In what stage of development is the  
technology?
• Is there proof-of-concept lab data?
• Is there a working prototype?
• Are there paying customers?
OTD can help navigate these considerations. However, we strongly recommend speaking 
with external advisors or mentors who can 
provide additional perspectives and guidance. Once IP protection is in place, talk about  
your ideas (with a confidentiality agreement in place, when appropriate); the more feedback you receive, the higher the likeli-hood of success.
T alk to potential customers. The information 
obtained by asking questions will provide 
critical feedback that not only will increase confidence in the startup’s potential, but 
also will enhance the likelihood of receiving 
funding and, ultimately, the success of  
the venture.
• Who are your customers? 
• What do they care about?
• Can the company’s product(s) solve  
their problems?
• How are they currently addressing  
the problems?
• How does the technology solve their 
problems in a unique way?
• How large is the market?
• How much are they willing to pay for  
a solution?
5
Startup Process: Six Steps to Launch
CONTACT OTD
Discuss your invention and how to protect the intellectual property to decide 
whether a startup company is a suitable option.
PROTECT INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 
Work with OTD to file a patent application on the invention before it comes public.  A major asset of a startup company is its intellectual property. After public disclosure, obtaining a patent, particularly outside the United States , may no  longer be possible.
SEEK INPUT AND NETWORK
Identify a mentor and work with him or her regularly, network with like-minded entrepreneurs, review ideas with potential investors, and evaluate the commercial aspects with potential customers. OTD provides the resources to get started.
PLAN THE BUSINESS
Develop an understanding of the market potential, competition, funding needs,  and path to productization and profitability. OTD’s expertise is useful in providing guidance on competitive analysis, market assessment, and business planning.
NEGOTIATE THE LICENSE OR OPTION AGREEMENT
Obtain a license or option agreement from Harvard to demonstrate to potential investors that the company has secured the rights to the technology. OTD leads these negotiations along with an officer of the company.
PURSUE FUNDING
Commercializing technology typically requires external capital. Introduce the company to venture capitalists, angel investors, and, perhaps, friends and family. OTD assists in making connections with entrepreneurs, angel investors, and  venture capitalists.1
2
3
4
5
6
6
Funding Sources
When starting a company, generating funding 
to support the business is perhaps the single 
most important task at hand. Before embark -
ing, it is necessary to determine how much 
funding is required and from where it will 
come. Here are some factors to consider in 
determining how much funding is necessary: 
• Time to market (that is, how long before 
initial sales)
• Employee salaries and benefits
• Space
• Equipment
• Travel
• Legal fees 
Funding for the company may come from 
one or more sources, including sales, grants, 
and investors. For example:
Organic Growth: Grow the business slowly 
based on sales, without the need to raise external funds. Organic growth can be  
a reasonable strategy for certain NewCo ventures. T ypically, however, university innovations are at such an early stage  
of development that additional funds  
are necessary to move them from the lab  
to market.Friends and Family: It may be possible to 
secure a small amount of funding from 
friends and family to launch the business while additional funding is sought. 
Small Business Innovation Research  
(SBIR): Apply for research grants. The U.S. 
government provides innovation research 
grants to small companies, which can be great sources of initial capital. SBIr grants 
can only be provided to a company, not 
directly to an academic lab. For more information, visit www.sbir.gov.
Angel Investors: Individuals or groups that 
invest their own money in early-stage 
companies. New England has a number of angel investor groups, including Launchpad, 
CommonAngels, Hub Angels, and Boston 
Harbor Angels. For a listing of angel groups in the region as well as other useful information, visit www.angelcapitalassociation.org/
directory.
Venture Capitalists: Venture capital firms 
manage and invest the funds of other investors. OTD is familiar with venture 
capitalists in New England and beyond, and 
can help to establish connections within these firms. more information can be found 
at www.newenglandvc.org.
In 2005, Dr. Andrew myers and colleagues in Harvard’s Department of Chemistry and 
Chemical Biology published results of their research on new classes of antibiotics aimed  at drug-resistant infections. OTD worked closely with Dr. myers to actively evaluate and pursue multiple commercialization alternatives. Extensive market, IP, and competitive  analyses were completed, leading OTD to initiate early development plans for a NewCo, including the commercialization strategy and the assembly of an initial investor syndicate. The efforts of OTD led to the launch of T etraphase Pharmaceuticals in 2006 with $25 million Series A financing to capitalize on this groundbreaking technology from Dr. myers.STARTUP SUCCESS STORY: T etraphase Pharmaceuticals
7
Presenting to Investors
Presenting the idea along with the supporting 
research to investors is an important step in 
the startup process, and one that requires 
thorough preparation. When scheduling a meeting with an investor, be very clear about 
its purpose. An informational or exploratory 
meeting may be acceptable, but be sure that the investor understands that this is the 
intent of the meeting. If the purpose of the 
meeting is to request funding, and the presentation team is not properly prepared, then subsequent meetings (and funding) are 
unlikely. Include the following information  
in the company pitch: 
• What problem does the technology 
address?
• How does the technology provide  
a solution?
• What market is being pursued?  
What is the addressable market? Do not 
inflate data; if the idea is for a particular market segment, provide data for that 
segment only. 
 - market size
 - T arget customer 
 - market segment • What is the state of the intellectual 
property? Is the technology well  
protected? Will IP be needed from  
other sources?
• Who is the competition? Investors expect that there is competition in every market 
area; claims of no competition are 
generally met with disbelief. What is the competitive advantage? Why would 
customers prefer the product or solution 
being offered over another?
• Who is on the executive team, and what 
are their roles? Why should someone 
invest in this team?
• How does the business model relate  to the sales strategy and pricing? 
• What are the expense and revenue projections for a five-year period?
• What are the key company milestones?
• How much money is being requested? 
How long will it last? How will the funds 
be spent? 
The presentation should be interesting and 
engaging. T ell a story and use examples.  
If potential customers or partners have provided feedback, include examples.
DFA is a not-for-profit organization established to translate early-stage technologies 
developed in the lab of Dr. George Whitesides of Harvard’s Department of Chemistry  and Chemical Biology. DFA’s efforts will introduce innovative, affordable, and effective point-of-care diagnostic solutions to medical problems in the developing world. Honoring OTD’s and Harvard’s commitment to the principles of socially responsible licensing, OTD formed a collaborative and supportive relationship with DFA. This relationship represents a new paradigm for how a university can fulfill its public service mission by facilitating the rapid and specific maturation of innovation for deployment in the global health arena.STARTUP SUCCESS STORY: Diagnostics For All (DFA)
8
 “OTD negotiated a fair and reasonable licensing   
 agreement with the NewCo that formed out of my  
 lab. They were extremely helpful to us both in the  
 initial stages of forming a company and beyond.”
— ANDrEW G. m yErS
 Amory Houghton Professor of Chemistry and Chemical Biology  
 Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology  
 Harvard Faculty of Arts and Sciences
9
Financing T erminology
Equity: The ownership interest of the company that is held by various parties. 
Initially, the founders typically own 100 percent of the company. A license 
agreement with Harvard and equity financing (in which someone provides 
funding in exchange for a percentage of the company) often occur early  
in the formation of a NewCo. At that time, the owners of the equity are the founders, the investors, and Harvard. The investor group will typically want  
40 to 60 percent of the company, though the percentages can vary based  
on a number of factors, and may be less for individual investors.  
Ownership compared to control: Equity investors are generally in control of the 
company. Provisions in the investment documents usually give the investors 
authority over certain decisions, such as whether to accept an acquisition offer, 
even if they have less than 50 percent of the outstanding shares. After a first 
round of financing, the founders’ total equity percentage is often “diluted” to 
less than 50 percent.
Option pool: A percentage of stock options set aside for special purposes.  
Sometimes, investors require that about 20 percent of the company’s options  
be reserved to attract key employees.
Pre- and post-money valuation: The company’s pre-money valuation is its 
value before an investment is made. Pre-money valuation must be reasonable. 
Post-money valuation is the pre-money valuation plus the amount invested.  
For example, if investors provide $3 million and the pre-money valuation  
is $2 million, the post-money valuation is $5 million. In this example, the 
investors have 60 percent of the equity.
Convertible debt: Funding that can be converted into shares at a later funding 
round. Sometimes convertible debt is a good funding alternative. However, the 
company immediately has debt on the balance sheet, and a valuation still must 
be set in case additional funding rounds are not needed.
10
Preferred shares compared to common shares: Investors typically take  
preferred shares, and the founders and employees hold common shares.  
Preferred shareholders may have additional rights. For example, preferred 
shareholders have the right to get a multiple of their investments back  
(often one times the amount, but it can be higher) before any distribution  
to other shareholders. This can be illustrated with a simple example in which  
the preferred shareholders (investors) invested $5 million, they hold 50 percent 
of the equity, have a 1X preference, and the startup is sold for $25 million.  
In this case, the investors will first get $5 million, and then the remaining  
$20 million is split according to the equity percentage of the shareholders:  
$10 million to the investors, and $10 million to the common shareholders.   
Anti-dilution: Protection against future financing when the value of the  
company decreases (also referred to as a down-round). Anti-dilution ensures 
that equity stakes do not drop below a certain percentage. The most common 
is weighted average anti-dilution. Full ratchet protection may also be used at 
times, and provides investors with the highest level of protection.
 
 
Only some of the provisions and terminology of a financing term sheet are 
referenced here, and these are not necessarily fully defined. More in-depth 
listings, definitions, descriptions, and sample term sheets can be found on the 
Internet. A mentor who is a seasoned entrepreneur is also an excellent source 
of guidance. When negotiating a term sheet with investors, the company’s 
principals should hire an attorney with relevant experience to represent them.
11
  
 “OTD’s understanding of and insight into the  
 formation of startup ventures were key to the  
 successful formation and launch of our company.”
— D AVID A. WEIT z
 mallinckrodt Professor of Physics and of Applied Physics  
 Harvard School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
12
Company Considerations
Legal representation: OTD is not in a 
position to provide legal advice, nor does  
this document purport to lend legal advice. 
Seeking counsel may be of great benefit in making the various decisions related to 
starting a company. An attorney with 
experience in business entity formation  and equity considerations can be a reliable 
and trusted advisor.    
Type of company: When incorporating, 
choose among an S-Corp, C-Corp, or 
Limited Liability Company (LLC). Companies that plan to take an equity investment 
should generally be established as a  
Delaware C-Corp.
Board of directors and the advisory board: 
Establish an advisory board early in the 
launch process. An advisory board should be 
three to four people who can provide guidance in areas with which the founders 
are not familiar; for example, raising money, 
hiring, sales, product development, and manufacturing. A board of directors should include one individual from the company, one or more investors, and independent industry representatives.
Management team: Consider each founder’s 
role in the management team. Generally, a 
faculty member will have an advisory board 
role, and a postdoctoral or PhD student may be the chief technology officer or the vice 
president of research and development. 
Other team members may be needed with strong domain expertise, sales experience, 
and marketing know-how. Investors are 
usually interested in a company with a strong management team; they are unlikely 
to fund even the best ideas if the right team  
is not in place.
Space, insurance, and payroll: make  
decisions about workspace, insurance, and payroll right away so that the team can 
concentrate on building the product and  
the business. Consider hiring an operations person or an assistant to manage these  
items, renting shared office space, and outsourcing payroll. 
  
Crimson Hexagon was established to develop and commercialize a novel algorithm 
developed by Dr. Gary king in Harvard’s Department of Government in the Faculty of  Arts and Sciences. Dr. king’s technology for sentiment analysis is an innovative means of gleaning opinions from unstructured text in ways that surpass existing approaches. Initially developed to determine sentiment on blogs about presidential candidates, its key marketable application is for companies to: 
• Learn more about common perceptions of their products
• receive real-time, ongoing information related to what is being written
• Understand the opinions and sentiments of their customer base
OTD worked closely with Dr. king to develop the initial business strategy of the company. 
The initial funding for the company came from an angel investors group that OTD introduced to the company’s founding CEO. STARTUP SUCCESS STORY: Crimson Hexagon, Inc.
13
Equity Considerations
When starting a company, the co-founders 
should agree about how to split the equity.  
A conversation of this nature should take 
place early in the process, and agreement 
should be formalized. Is the contribution of 
each founder equal? Is the risk the same for 
each founder? For example, is one founder 
leaving a job to work full-time and unpaid  
at the company, while another is continuing 
in his or her current job until the startup is 
able to raise money? 
It is also important to consider reverse 
vesting, where each founder’s equity  
percentage becomes available over time.  
If all the founders get all of their equity on 
day one, and six months later one founder 
leaves while other founders continue to work 
for several more years, the equity will not be fairly distributed. r everse vesting allows an 
individual to receive stock immediately, 
which may be beneficial for tax reasons, but 
still maintains vesting requirements, such as 
length of employment, to be met.
Consider if equity can and should be used to 
pay for outside services. Legal counsel, marketing, and accounting professionals may take equity in lieu of cash. This type  
of payment may seem useful before money 
has been raised, but take note — it can be 
extremely difficult to establish a fair amount of equity in exchange for such services.
How much equity should be set aside for  
the advisory board and for the board of 
directors? T ypical amounts are one-quarter 
to one-half percent for advisory board 
members, and one-half to one percent  
for directors.
There are personal tax implications for 
founders, depending on how equity is 
granted. It is vital that you get legal advice 
on these tax implications before incorporat -
ing the company and issuing shares. Choose 
legal counsel that has experience working 
with startup companies.
Harvard expects equity and other consider -
ation, including royalties, in exchange for a 
license to the IP. This equity is a minority 
position and can include anti-dilution 
provisions. Harvard does not invest money 
directly in startup companies.
Dr. David A. Weitz of Harvard’s School of Engineering and Applied Sciences is a  
world-renowned expert in microfluidics and emulsions. His research led to the application of techniques in the field of DNA sequencing. Already a seasoned entrepreneur, Dr. Weitz approached OTD about starting a new company to commercialize his latest innovations. GnuBIO, Inc., was launched in 2010 to develop this next-generation sequencing technol-ogy for the molecular diagnostic and applied research markets. Working closely with  Dr. Weitz and the GnuBIO founding team, OTD made introductions to potential investors, advised the team on an appropriate capital structure, provided guidance on a fair distribu-tion of equity, and worked collaboratively with all parties to ensure a smooth and efficient negotiation of the license terms.STARTUP SUCCESS STORY: GnuBIO, Inc.
14
 
At Harvard
OTD: The Office of T echnology Development 
is responsible for Harvard-owned intellectual 
property and takes an active role in working 
with faculty, graduate students, and postdoc-toral entrepreneurs within the Harvard 
community.
TECH: The T echnology and Entrepreneurship 
Center at Harvard works with undergradu-
ate students to support and encourage their 
entrepreneurial ideas, and runs an annual business plan competition.
HBS Entrepreneurship Center: The Arthur 
rock Center for Entrepreneurship at Harvard 
Business School is a resource for HBS 
students interested in company formation. 
Harvard Innovation Lab: Launched in 2011, 
the Innovation Lab is a resource for student entrepreneurs throughout the Harvard 
community.
Harvard Startups: A y ahoo! group that 
provides resources for entrepreneurs and 
business individuals to post questions, 
information, jobs, and more. mainly targeted 
at Harvard alumni.
Commercializing Science and High  
T echnology: An HBS class that is open  
to students throughout the University,  
one of several such entrepreneurial classes 
at Harvard. Student teams work on  
commercialization strategies for Harvard 
research lab technologies.Around New England
MIT Enterprise Forum: A forum that offers numerous events for entrepreneurs around 
New England (no affiliation with mIT is 
required).
Cambridge Innovation Center: One of 
several places that provide shared office 
space for early-stage companies.
T echStars:  A mentorship-driven seed-stage 
investment program that runs in Boston and 
other cities.
Dogpatch Labs: Created by Polaris Venture 
Partners to connect entrepreneurs and help founders conceive and launch startups.
Betaspring:  A mentorship-driven startup 
accelerator program for technology and 
design entrepreneurs based in Providence, rI. 
Blogs
Numerous blogs exist that are great sources of information for the aspiring entrepreneur. 
Browse the selection below for an introduc-
tion to the ever-growing blogging world.
• www.robgo.org
• www.platformsandnetworks.blogspot.com 
• www.founderresearch.blogspot.com 
• www.bostonvcblog.typepad.com 
• www.avc.com
• www.feld.com/wp
• www.steveblank.comSome Resources for Entrepreneurs
15
Key Factors for Success
This guide provides an overview of the startup process and the relevant aspects of starting  
a business. Of course, there are many additional sources of information. However, OTD is a 
good place to start — our team can provide sound advice and guidance.
Be sure to: 
• Obtain trusted advice and mentorship.
• Talk to customers.
• Bring on the right team members.
• Be passionate.
• Prepare a one-minute elevator pitch that will grab someone’s attention and motivate  
him or her to ask for more information.
• Practice the company pitch.
• Network with other entrepreneurs and representatives in the industry. 
OTD can: 
• Provide an initial sounding board for exploring startup ideas.
• Protect the intellectual property that is the foundation of the new company.
• Make introductions to entrepreneurs, angel investors, and venture capitalists.
• Provide assistance with business planning.
• Assist you on competitive analysis, market assessment, and investor pitches.
In Cambridge
(617) 495-3067 
(617) 495-9568 fax
Holyoke Center Suite 727E 
1350 Massachusetts Avenue 
Cambridge, MA 02138 USAIn Longwood 
(617) 432-0920 
(617) 432-2788 fax
Gordon Hall Suite 414 
25 Shattuck Street 
Boston, MA 02115 USAHarvard University Office of T echnology Development  
www.otd.harvard.edu
16
These logos represent a few of the many Harvard startups that OTD has helped launch.
QSTREAM

In Cambridge
(617) 495-3067 
(617) 495-9568 fax
Holyoke Center Suite 727E 
1350 Massachusetts Avenue 
Cambridge, MA 02138 USAIn Longwood 
(617) 432-0920 
(617) 432-2788 fax
Gordon Hall Suite 414 
25 Shattuck Street 
Boston, MA 02115 USAHarvard University Office of T echnology Development  
www.otd.harvard.edu
Copyright © 2011 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
